# 3. Vim

Throughout this course, we’ll recommend using the Vim text editor. Vim is an enhanced version of vi, so if you’re familiar with vi, this will just be a refresher.

Vim is a favorite among developers and power users because of its flexibility and efficiency. It’s a "modal" text editor, meaning the keys you press can either input text or perform commands, depending on the mode. When you first open Vim, you’ll start in command mode, where keys are used to navigate and control the editor. To input text, you’ll switch to insert mode.

Vim builds on the original vi editor, created by Bill Joy in the 1970s for UNIX, by adding modern functionality and usability improvements. If you're new to Vim, don't worry—we'll walk you through the basics!

Procedure - Using Vim
Review (read-only) the following Vim commands:

To start editing by entering the --INSERT-- mode:

press i
To stop editing and return to command mode:

press ESC
To save and quit:

press SHIFT + : press SHIFT and the COLON keys at the same time
type wq (write out and quit)
press ENTER to confirm
To quit without saving:

press SHIFT + : press SHIFT and the COLON keys at the same time
type q! (quit and ignore all changes)
press ENTER to confirm
Move to the student home directory.
student@bchd:~$ cd

The vim command works by following it up with the name of the file you want to edit or create. Open a new file, zork.test, with Vim.
student@bchd:~$ vim zork.test

Your screen should now look blank with a lot of blue ~s along the left side.

When you first enter Vim, you are in command mode and can't write any text. To write text, you'll need to switch to --INSERT-- mode. Press:

i
i = INSERT, easy enough!

Notice in the bottom left corner of the screen it now says --INSERT--.

Try typing in some random text! You can also paste in text as well. Copy the following by clicking the clipboard icon next to the text block:

West of House  
You are standing in an open field west of a white house, with a boarded front door.  
There is a small mailbox here.
Now click on your Vim screen and do any of the following to paste:

🖱️ Right-click, then select Paste.
Press Shift + Insert.
Press Ctrl + Shift + V.
Great! Now leave --INSERT-- mode and return to command mode by pressing the Escape key.

Esc
Notice that --INSERT-- has disappeared from the bottom left of the screen. Generally, pressing the Escape key will always return you to command mode.

Use the directional arrow keys to move your cursor around the screen. Your mouse won't help you here!

We're now ready to do our first Vim command, saving and quitting. Do the following:

press SHIFT + :
press SHIFT and then the COLON key at the same time

type wq (write out and quit)
press ENTER to confirm
You should be back at your command line! Let's confirm the file saved correctly. We can use the cat command to display the contents of files to the screen.

student@bchd:~$ cat zork.test

Your output should resemble whatever text you entered in Vim.

Vim can also be used to edit existing files. Edit the file zork.test again.

student@bchd:~$ vim zork.test

Remember, you enter Vim in command mode. Let's try some handy keyboard shortcuts. Press the following capital letter to jump to the end of the file:

press SHIFT + g
press SHIFT and the g keys at the same time

Nice, right? One thing that's annoying about Vim is moving your cursor to the end of lines. Press the following to move your cursor to the end of the current line, which will also automatically enter --INSERT-- mode.

press SHIFT + a
press SHIFT and the a keys at the same time

You'll notice it says --INSERT-- at the bottom left of your screen again. Once again, you can type normally. Add additional text, such as the following:

West of House  
You are standing in an open field west of a white house, with a boarded front door.  
There is a small mailbox here.  
Open mailbox  
Opening the small mailbox reveals a leaflet.  
Read leaflet  
(leaflet taken)  
"WELCOME TO ALTA3 LABS!"
Great! Now leave --INSERT-- mode and return to command mode by pressing the Escape key.

Esc
Vim has a bad reputation for being difficult to exit. Assuming you've edited your file since reopening it, try doing the following. Be warned, it WON'T work!

press SHIFT + :
press SHIFT and the COLON keys at the same time

type q (quit without saving)
press ENTER to confirm
You'll get a pink bar with an error message saying something like:

E37: No write since last change (add ! to override)
Don't be frustrated—this is Vim telling you, "Hey, you're trying to quit but you didn’t save your changes!" Let's try quitting again, but this time unlock the almighty power of :q!. The ! will force Vim to quit. Perform the following to return to the command line without saving any changes:

press SHIFT + :
press SHIFT and the COLON keys at the same time

type q! (quit without saving)
press ENTER to confirm
We're back at the command line! Confirm that none of the changes you made were saved.

student@bchd:~$ cat zork.test

You shouldn't see any of those changes you made. We're all done, and we don't need this file anymore! Remove the file.

student@bchd:~$ rm zork.test

Becoming proficient with Vim can really enhance your Linux experience. Click the image below to open a PDF copy of Alta3's Vim cheat sheet! These make very useful wall art and may cause you to become the envy of your colleagues.



Get all of Alta3's Cheat Sheets here! https://blog.alta3.com/posters

If you ran this lab and got stuck a few times, don't worry! Go back and try again! Working within the Vim environment is a basic Linux admin skill that is useful for anyone working with the Linux CLI.

