# 6. Pod Basics


# Original Material

## Objectives
In this lab, you'll be creating a Pod with specific parameters within a particular namespace. This task is testing your ability to, in a timely fashion, piece together a new pod. Luckily for us, we have the ability to grab a template pod manifest from our permitted reference materials, so there is no need to memorize everything about how to write a manifest, but it does help. Permitted reference material you can use while taking the CKAD exam can be found here from kubernetes.io -- Good luck!

## Lab Setup
Run the following command to setup the lab.

student@bchd:~$ drill pod-basics

## Summary
Create a single pod in namespace talent with the image nginx:1.7.9. The pod should be named singer and the container should be named opera.

Weight: 3%

## Tasks
Create a Pod manifest as specified in the summary.

Persist the manifest to ETCD, having it be built in the talent namespace.

Verify the Pod was created successfully.

Hints
Create a Pod manifest as specified in the summary.

Click
Don't try to write a manifest from scratch! Go to the Kubernetes documentation (which is permitted on the exam!) and copy/paste the template you find there. Use your documentation -- CLICK HERE.

Persist the manifest to ETCD, having it be built in the talent namespace.

Click
There are two kubectl commands we can use to create a pod from a manifest. One is declarative, and the other is imperative.

Verify the Pod was created successfully.

Click
We have another simple kubectl command to run here. However, we could probably benefit from using a command which would describe the Pod for us, so we can double check the parameters.

Answers
Create a Pod manifest as specified in the summary.

Click
Create the following Pod Manifest.

student@bchd:~$ vim singer.yaml


Press ESC to exit Insert Mode and type wq! to write and quit out of vim.

Persist the manifest to ETCD, having it be built in the talent namespace.

Click
Create the Pod in the talent namespace.

student@bchd:~$ kubectl apply -f singer.yaml

pod/singer created
Verify the Pod was created successfully.

Click
Examine the newly created pod and ensure that it is running.

student@bchd:~$ kubectl get -f singer.yaml

NAME     READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
singer   1/1     Running   0          2m2s
Describe the Pod, ensuring our required parameters were persisted to ETCD.

student@bchd:~$ kubectl describe -f singer.yaml

Name:             singer          # <-- 
Namespace:        talent          # <--
Priority:         0
Service Account:  default
Node:             node-2/10.0.126.84
Start Time:       Thu, 30 Mar 2023 18:35:50 +0000
Labels:           <none>
Annotations:      <none>
Status:           Running
IP:               192.168.247.18
IPs:
  IP:  192.168.247.18
Containers:
  opera:                         # <--
    Container ID:   containerd://6346724571feb7cb4450c63eb000931e4957e97bfbf6c2825e4b6d8830b419c6
    Image:          nginx:1.7.9  # <--
[TRUNCATED]
Just another friendly reminder to ALWAYS verify your work. Grade yourself, and you'll know exactly how you scored as soon as the Exam is over. Also, the verification step will help you catch careless errors.

Lab Teardown
Want to run the lab again? Run the following script to teardown your work.

student@bchd:~$ teardown pod-basics