# Deploy Kubernetes Using Ansible


Lab Objective
The objective of this lab is to learn the Kubernetes components you will be working with. We will make sure we have IP connectivity to all of them and familiarize ourselves with the components that constitute the underlying Kubernetes cloud, the host IP addresses, and the host names. The lab environments you will be working in leverage the Alta3 Cloud Environment Services (ACES) (https://alta3.com/) to streamline provisioning of the computer infrastructure required to bootstrap a Kubernetes cluster.

The basic working components of Kubernetes are outlined here:
https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/overview/components/

Now it is time to deploy Kubernetes! To do this you will use an Ansible Playbook designed by Alta3. Ansible is an open source automation tool designed to automate the deployment of configurations and software. It's actually perfect for deploying Kubernetes.

You can find additional information about Ansible here:
https://alta3.com/overview-ansible

Let's take a look at your current environment. After the playbook runs, the following configuration will be observed.

+--------------------+    +--------------------+     +--------------------+
| Beachhead          |    | Controller         |     | Node-1             |
| bchd               |    |                    |     |                    |
|                    |    |                    |     |                    |
|                    |    |                    |     |                    |
+--------------------+    +--------------------+     +--------------------+

                                                     +--------------------+
                                                     | Node-2             |
                                                     |                    |
                                                     |                    |
                                                     |                    |
                                                     +--------------------+
Questions
How many machines are running?
Four. Beachhead (your terminal), one controller node, and two worker nodes.

What are the IPs of each machine?
This will become clear once the playbook runs.

Procedure
We want to verify connectivity throughout our environment. Never used fping? https://fping.org/ is a program to send ICMP echo probes to network hosts. It's similar to ping, but enjoys much better performance when pinging multiple hosts.

student@bchd:~$ fping -A controller node-1 node-2 

The output will be similar to the below.

10.5.203.188 is alive
10.13.108.236 is alive
10.8.217.4 is alive
Let's initialize your current Kubernetes environment (this may take a while, somewhere around eight minutes). If you are interested in what changes occurred, look at the playbook readout. In short, running the playbook sets up your networking, puts certs in the right location, and deploys etcd, nodes, controllers, services, and load balancer.

Move into the ~/git/kubernetes-the-alta3-way directory.

student@bchd:~$ cd ~/git/kubernetes-the-alta3-way

Run the Ansible playbook. Ansible is a tool that allows users to describe the state they want to achieve in code using a YAML document called a 'playbook.' Ansible then works to ensure that the state described in the playbook is achieved on the target machines. In short, Ansible makes it easy for anyone to write complex installation routines. The playbook you are about to run, main.yml, will install Kubernetes. The inventory file, hosts.yml, instructs Ansible to install Kubernetes on specific targets.

student@bchd:~/git/kubernetes-the-alta3-way$ ansible-playbook main.yml

The output will look similar to the example below...

PLAY [bootstrap] ************************************************************************************

TASK [Gathering Facts] ******************************************************************************
ok: [controller]
ok: [node-1]
ok: [node-2]

TASK [bootstrap : raw apt update 1] *****************************************************************
changed: [controller]
If the playbook ends with some red fails, let the instructor know.

While you are waiting for that to finish up, if you have a GitHub account, log in and visit https://github.com/alta3/kubernetes-the-alta3-way and click on the star at the top right of the page.

To learn more about tmux and your environment, please visit our quick demonstration on tmux here: https://youtu.be/xKJfbs9eSug

Return to the home directory.

student@bchd:~/git/kubernetes-the-alta3-way$ cd ~

Kubectl is a command line tool for controlling Kubernetes clusters. Issue kubectl get nodes list the nodes.

student@bchd:~$ kubectl get nodes

NAME     STATUS   ROLES    AGE    VERSION
node-1   Ready    <none>   133m   v1.23
node-2   Ready    <none>   133m   v1.23
Use the kubectl describe nodes command to view detailed information about the nodes. Your instructor can help you parse back through this information, as it may scroll off your screen. You will learn more about the get and describe commands in subsequent labs.

student@bchd:~$ kubectl describe nodes

To scroll using tmux, first press CTRL + B, then [ and if you've done it correctly, a yellow screen buffer will appear in the upper right corner. You can now use the up and down arrow to scroll, and q to quit.

This will come in handy for you. Adding to your .bashrc file will allow for autocompletion of the kubectl command.

student@bchd:~$ echo 'source <(kubectl completion bash)' >> ~/.bashrc

Now re-source your .bashrc file.

student@bchd:~$ source ~/.bashrc

Next lets verify that this works as expected by creating our own pod, using our own image. We will discuss this in more depth later on.

student@bchd:~$ batcat ~/mycode/yaml/my_first_pod.yaml


Run the new manifest.

student@bchd:~$ kubectl apply -f ~/mycode/yaml/my_first_pod.yaml

Next we will make sure that the Pod exists and has launched successfully.

student@bchd:~$ kubectl get pods

NAME         READY   STATUS    RESTARTS   AGE
myfirstpod   1/1     Running   0          19s
Success! You won't need that pod anymore, so go ahead and delete it.

student@bchd:~$ kubectl delete -f ~/mycode/yaml/my_first_pod.yaml

Click for Code to Catch Up!
{ # Deploy Kubernetes using Ansible
pushd $HOME/git/kubernetes-the-alta3-way
ansible-playbook main.yml
popd
kubectl get nodes
kubectl apply -f "${HOME}/mycode/yaml/my_first_pod.yaml"
kubectl wait --for condition=Ready --timeout 30s pod/myfirstpod
kubectl get pods
kubectl delete -f "${HOME}/mycode/yaml/my_first_pod.yaml"
} || echo "Execution stopped, see above error"
Alta3 Logo
